Compliance is the process of adhering to internal standards and external regulations and enables organizations to avoid fines and security breaches.

Security frameworks are guidelines used for building plans to help mitigate risks and threats to data and privacy.

Security controls are safeguards designed to reduce specific security risks. They are used with security frameworks to establish a strong security posture.

Security posture is an organization’s ability to manage its defense of critical assets and data and react to change. A strong security posture leads to lower risk for the organization.

A threat actor, or malicious attacker, is any person or group who presents a security risk. This risk can relate to computers, applications, networks, and data.

An internal threat can be a current or former employee, an external vendor, or a trusted partner who poses a security risk. At times, an internal threat is accidental. For example, an employee who accidentally clicks on a malicious email link would be considered an accidental threat. Other times, the internal threat actor intentionally engages in risky activities, such as unauthorized data access.

Network security is the practice of keeping an organization's network infrastructure secure from unauthorized access. This includes data, services, systems, and devices that are stored in an organization’s network.

Cloud security is the process of ensuring that assets stored in the cloud are properly configured, or set up correctly, and access to those assets is limited to authorized users. The cloud is a network made up of a collection of servers or computers that store resources and data in remote physical locations known as data centers that can be accessed via the internet. Cloud security is a growing subfield of cybersecurity that specifically focuses on the protection of data, applications, and infrastructure in the cloud.

Programming is a process that can be used to create a specific set of instructions for a computer to execute tasks. These tasks can include:

Automation of repetitive tasks (e.g., searching a list of malicious domains)

Reviewing web traffic 

Alerting suspicious activity


Course 3 !!! istrazi vise tcp/ip osi modelu !!!
Module 1:
	network groups of connected devices
	ISP internet service provider
	CSP cloud service provider
	LAN local area network - small area connections
	WAN wide area network - large area like city, country
	HUB device that broadcasts information to all devices on network
	SWITCH connection between two devices 
	ROUTER network device that connects multiple devices together
	MODEM connects router to the internet and brings internet thru LAN
	VIRTUALIZATION TOOLS software that preform network operations
	
	TCP transmission control protocol between two devices
	IP internet protocol
	port 25 email
	port 443 secure internet communications	
	port 20 large file transfers
	
	TCP/IP model framework used to visualize how data is organized and transmitted across the network
	4 layers
	1. network access layer
	2. internet layer
	3. transport layer
	4. application layer
	
Module 2:
	Network protocols - set of rules to describe delivery and structure data
	Transmission control protocol TCP internet com protocol connecting two devices; only two devices
	Address resolution protocol ARP - determines mac address of next router or device on the path
	DNS Domain name system translates internet domain into IP address
	
	3 categories com protocol, managment, and security
	
	Firewall 
	Stateful keeps track of information and filters out threats
	Stateless based on predefined rules, and does not keep track of information
	NGFWs even better than stateful firewall
	
	VPN changes ip address
	Encapsulation protects data by wrapping sensitive data in other data packets
	https protects information, vpn protects your privacy
	
	
	Security zone network that protects internal network from internet
	Network segmentation
	Uncontrolled zone any network outside of org. control
	Controled zone subnet that protects internal network from the uncontrolled zone
	3 areas of controled zones:
	1. demilitarized zone DMZ
	2. internal network
	3. restricted zone 
	
	Proxy server server that fulfilles requests of a client by forwarding them on to other servers
	Forward proxy server regulates and restrics persons access to the internet
	Reverse proxy server <--
	Email proxy server filter spam email
	
	
Module 3: secure against network intrusions, napadi, vrste napada, kako se odbraniti
	DoS - denial of service: attack floods network or server with network traffic
	DDos - distrubited denial of service - using multiple devices or servers in different locations to flood network
	SYN (syncronize) flood attack type of DoS attack that simulates the first step of TCP handshake connection and floods a server with syn packets
	ICMP - internet control message protocol used by devices to tell each other about data transmission errors across the network
	ICMP FLOOD type of attack preformed by attacker repeatedly sending icmp packets to a network server
	Ping of deatch type of dos attack caused when a hacker pings a system by sending oversized icmp packet bigger than 64kb
	
	consequences: financial; reputation; public safety
	 
	TCPDUMP is a command line network protocol analyzer
	network protocol analyzers can also be used to:

	Establish a baseline for network traffic patterns and network utilization metrics.

	Detect and identify malicious traffic

	Create customized alerts to send the right notifications when network issues or security threats arise.

	Locate unauthorized instant messaging (IM), traffic, or wireless access points.

	However, attackers can also use network protocol analyzers maliciously to gain information about a specific network. For example, attackers can capture data packets that contain sensitive information, such as account usernames and passwords.
	
	
	Packet sniffing
	Passive packet sniffing data packets are read in transit
	Active packet sniffing data packets are manipulated in transit
	Prevention from active packet sniffing use vpn, use https and dont use public wifi
	
	IP SPOOFING attacker changes source ip of a data packet to impersonate an authorized system and gain access to a network
	1. on-path attack
	2. replay attack
	3. smurf attack
	On-path attack hacker placed in the middle of connection to intercept or alter data in tranist 
	Replay attack intercepts data packet in tranist and delays it or repeats it at another time
	Smurf attack combination of ddos attack and ip spoofing - attacker sniffs an authorized users ip address and floods it with packets
	
	** configure firewall to reject ip address that are the same as local network **
	
	
	
Module 4: security hardening, os hardening, network hardening practices, cloud network hardening
	On hardware, OS, networks, applications, cloud infrastructure, databases; 
	sec. analysts patch updates and backups
	request password change
	configuration check, updating encryption standards
	removing or disabling unused applications and services, unused ports, reduce access permission across devices and network
	
	SEC HARDENING
	Security hardening process of strengthening system to reduce vulnerability and attack surface
	Attack Surface - all vulnerabilities that can be exploited
	Penetration test simulated attack that helps identify vulnerabilities across systems network, websites, applications and processes 
	
	
	OS HARDENING 
	Patch update software and os update; address sec. vulnerabilities
	Baseline configuration(baseline image) - documented se of specifications within a system used for future builds releases and updates 
	Hardware and software disposal 
	Implementing strong password policy
	Multi-factor authentitacion MFA verify identity in two or more ways password, keycard, fingerprint
	
	Brute Force Attack is a trail-and-error process of discovering private information.
	Simple brute force attacks - trying to guess username and password
	Dictionary attacks - use list of commonly used passwords and stolen credentials
	
	Assessing vulnerabilities testing network with VM or sandbox or simulate cybersecurity incident.
	VMs..
	Sandbox type of testing environment that allows execute of software and programs separate from your network. Can be stand-alone physical computer. Can be tricked to recognize when its vm or sandbox and be harmless until being on real network.
	
	Prevention's from brute force:
	Salting and hashing converts infromation into unique value that can then be used to determine its integrity. Salting is adding ramdom characters to increase the length and complexity.
	MFA and 2FA - mfa 2 or more 2fa only two forms of verification.
	CAPTHCA and reCAPTCHA determine human from computer
	Password policies strong complex etc, freqluenty new ones
	
	NETWORK SECURITY HARDENING
	-port filtering
	-network access privilege
	-encryption
	Some performed regularly some once and updated as needed
	Regularly: firewall rules maintence
		network log analysis
		patch updates
		server backups
	Log record of events that recurs in network
	Network log analysis process of examining network logs to identify events of interest
	SIEM app that collects and analyzes log data
	
	Performed once:
	port filtering - firewall function that blocks or allows certain port numbers to limit unwanted communication
	network segmentation
	all inf should be encrypted using latest enc. standards	
	
	Network security applications
	firewall, ids, ips, siem
	Firewall blocks or allows traffic based on a set of rules. Packet header inspected and allowed or denied based on its port number.
	IDS intusion detection system only monitors system and alerts. Always placed behind firewall and before LAN.
	IPS - intrusion prevention system monitors activity and takes action to stop the activity. Reports or blocks a specific sender or drops network packets that seem suspect. Posible false positives.
	Full Packet Caprure Devices record and analyze all of the data that is ransmitted over network.
	SIEM collects and analyzes log data, monitors citical activities. In real time. Analyze network log data from ids ips firewall vpn, proxies and dns logs.
	
	CLOUD NETWORK 
	remote data centers via the internet
	Identity access megagement IAM collection of processes and technologies that help organizations manage digital identities in their environment.
	Cloud service providers CSP offer numberous applications and services for org. at low cost.
	Zero-day attack is an exploit that was previously unknown. CSP know abou zero day before a traditional it organization does.
	Visibility and tracking
	Changing fast in the cloud
	Shared responsibility model - this model delineates the security responsibilities of the CSP and the organization, ensuring clarity on who is responsible for securing different aspects of the cloud infrastructure.
	
	**Attack Surface: The attack surface refers to the total number of entry points into a network, which increases with the number of cloud services used, necessitating enhanced security measures.
Shared Responsibility Model: This model delineates the security responsibilities of the CSP and the organization, ensuring clarity on who is responsible for securing different aspects of the cloud infrastructure.
Identity Access Management (IAM): IAM is a collection of processes and technologies that help organizations manage digital identities and authorize user access to cloud resources.
Zero-Day Attacks: Zero-day attacks exploit previously unknown vulnerabilities, and CSPs often have mechanisms to address these threats more swiftly than traditional IT organizations.
Configuration: Proper configuration of cloud services is critical to maintaining security and compliance, especially during migrations, as misconfigurations can lead to vulnerabilities.**

	Hypervisors: Software that abstracts the host's hardware from the operating environment, crucial for managing virtual machines in cloud services. virus ne bezi u main comp
	Baselining cover how the cloud environment is configured and set up.
	Cryptography 
	Cryptography erasure erasing the encryption key for the encrypted data.
	
	
	
	
Course 4: os and how they relate to apps and hardware; linux os, linux command line, sql to query database
	Module 1: about os
		Application program that preforms special task
		user -> application -> os -> hardware (and back)
		Bios basic input/output system
		UEFI unified externsible firmware interface contains loading instructions for the computer and replaces bios on more modern systems.
		User interface program that allows user to control os
		GUI graphical user interface icons/visual
		CLI command-line interface text based user interface that uses commands to interact with pc
		
		
	Module 2: linux
		components of linux:
		user - person interacting with person
		applications - program that performs specific task 
		shell - command line interpreter
		filesystem hierarchy standard (FHS) - components of linux that organizes data 	 
		kernel - component of linux OS that manages processes and memory
		hardware - physical components
		Digital forensics - collecting and analyzing data to determine what happened after attack
		
	Module 3: linux commands
		navigation: cd, ls, pwd, cat, head(prints 10 lines, or head -n 5 note.txt), less(by pages), tail
		
		filtering: 
			grep searches file, and returns lines containing specified string grep users note.txt
			grep - grep OS updates.txt 
			find - -name;-iname; -mtime(days); -mmin(minutes)
			/home/analyst/projects -name "*log*"
			find /home/analyst/projects -mtime -3 (3 days; +1 more than one day, -1 less than day)
		
		managing directories and files:
			mkdir, rmdir, touch, rm
		
		permisions:
			read, write, execute
			types of user: user, group, other
			 
			drwxrwxrwx - full permision for the user group
			 
			d = directory
			 
			ls -l = display permissions 
			ls -la = -||- and hidden files
			 
			change permissions:
			chmod(change mod) - changes permissions on files and directories
			 
			chmod u-r,g+w test.txt = minus removes, + adds permissions
			 
		deleting and adding users:
			root user - user with elevated privilages to modify the system
			useradd - adds user to the system(only root users with sudo privilages can use add command)
			userdel - removes user from the system, if used with -r deletes all files of deleted user
			usermod - modifies existing user account
			-g: adds to group
			-G: adds user to additional groups, supplemental or secondary groups, can be used with -a which appends user to an existing group
			-d: Changes the user’s home directory.
			-l: Changes the user’s login name.
			-L: Locks the account so the user can’t log in.
			chown - changes owndership of a file or directory. To change group ownership user ":" sudo chown :security test.tx
			
	
	Module 4: DATABASES AND SQL
		Database - organized collection of data or information
		-accessed by multiple ppl
		-store massive amount of data
		-preform complex tasks while accessing data
		Relational database - structured, containing tables that are related to each other
		Primary key - a column where every row has a unique entry - no duplicates, no null or empty values
		Foreign key - a column in a table that is a primary key in another table - can have empty values and duplicates
		
		SQL structured query language - used to crate, interact with and request information from a database
		Query - a request for data from a database table or a combination of tables
		
		SELECT - indicates which columns to return
		FROM - indicates which table to query
		ORDER BY - specify a column to base the sort on (DESC for descending order)
		
	filtering in sql:
		WHERE country = 'USA':
		WHERE country LIKE 'US%'; (% wildcard for patterns)
		
	common data types: string, numeric and date & time WHERE hiredate BETWEEN '2002-01-01' AND '2003-01-01';
	AND OR NOT
	inner joins outer joins, right joing, left join, full outer join
	count, sum, avg
	
	
	
Course 5: Module 1 - assets, threats
		security risk planning: assets, threats, vulnerabilities
		risk - anything that can impact confidentiality, integrity or availability of an asset
		threat - anything that negatively impact asset
		vulnerability - weakness that can be exploited by threat 
		threats - intentional and unintentional
		vulnerabilities - technical or human
		
		asset inventory - assets that need to be protected
		asset classification - how important it is to an organization	
 		asset classification levels:
 			public - that can be shared with anyone 
 			internal-only - shared only inside organization
 			confidential - limited to specific users
 			restricted - highly sensitive/need-to-know


		States of data: in use, in transit, at rest
		data in use - data being accessed by one or more users
		data in transit - data traveling from one point to another
		data in rest - data not being accessed currently 
		information security(InfoSec) - keeping all above away from unauthorized users
		
		There are three main categories of cloud-based services:
		Software as a service (SaaS) - front end applications 
		Platform as a service (PaaS) - backend
		Infrastructure as a service (IaaS) - remote access to back-end systems


		Types of risk categories: damage, disclosure, loss of information
		Elements of a security plan:
			Policies - set of rules that reduces risk and protects information
			Standards - references that inform how to set policies 
			Procedures - instructions to perform a specific security task

	Compliance - process of adhering to internal standards and external regulations
	Regulations - rules set by government or other authority to control the way something is done
	
	NIST  Cybersecurity framework (CSF)
	nist csf components: core, tiers, profiles
		CORE - desired outcomes: identify, protect, detect, respond, recover(and govern - added in feb.2024)
		TIERS - way to measure performance 1-4
		PROFILES - current state of security plan
		

Course 5: Module 2 protecting assets

	Security controls - safeguards to reduce specific security risk
	Principle of least privilege - only minimal access to complete a task	
	Data owner - The person that decides about their information
	Data custodian - Anything or anyone who's responsible for information
	Data steward - someone who implements data governance policies 
	(three above are data governance)
	Types of accounts: guest, user, service and privileged accounts
	Approaches to auditing user accounts: usage, privilege, account change audits.
	 
	 Information privacy - protection from unauthorized access and distribution of data
	 Information security - keeping data in all states away from unauthorized users
	 Privacy is about providing ppl with control over their information.
	 Security is about protecting ppls choices and information safe
	 
	 3 most influential industry regulations:
	 GDPR - General data protection regulation
	 PCI DSS - Payment card industry data security standard
	 HIPAA - health insurance portability and accountability act
	 
	 Security audit - review of security controls, polices and procedures against a set of expectations
	 Security assessment -  check to determine how resilient current security is
	 
	 
	 Chiper - algorithm that encrypts information
	 Cryptographic key - mechanism that decrypts ciphertext
	 Public key infrastructure(PKI) - encryption framework that secures the exchange of information online
	 PKI process:
	 1. Exchange of encrypted information thru asymmetric or symmetric or both
	 	Asymmetric encryption - use of public and private key pair for enc. and dec. of data
	 	Symmetric encryption - use single secret ket to exchange information
	2. Establish trust using a system of digital certificates
		Digital certificate - a file that verifies the identity of a public key holder

	Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) - modern symmetric enc. takes 128 192 or 256 bits.
	Rivest Shamir Adleman RSA - 1024 2048 4096 used for highy sensetive data
	Digital Signature Algorithm DSA - 2048 bits
	
	Generating keys - with OpenSSL key generator
	
	Hash function - algorithm that produces a code that cant be decrypted
	
	Access controls - security controls that manage acces, authorization, and accountability of information
	AAA framework: authentication, authorization, accounting
	Authentication - *providing identity -who are u
		Factors of authentication:
			1.Knowledge - password i sec question
			2.Ownership - something the user possesses
			3.Characteristic: fingerprint, face scan
		Single sign-on(SSO) - technology that combines several different logins into one
		MFA ...
	
	Authorization: *defining permissions -what can u do
		least privilege, separation of duties
		https..
		OAuth - open-standard authorization protocol that shares designated access between aplications
		API token - small block of encrypted code that contains information about a user
		
	Accounting:  *tracking usage -what did u do
		Session - sequence of network HTTP basic auth requests and responses associated with the same user(like visiting web site)
		Session ID - unique token that identifies a user and their device while accessing the system
		Session cookie - token websites use to validate how long that session should last
		Session hijacking - hacker obtaining users session ID
		
		
		
Module 3: vulnerabilities in systems
	Exploit - taking advantage of a vulnerability
	Vulnerability management - process of finding and patching vulnerabilities
		4 steps:
			1. identify vulnerabilities
			2. consider potential exploits
			3. prepare defenses against threats
			4. evaluate those defenses
	
	Defense in depth - layered approach to vulnerability management that reduces risk
		1. perimeter layer(user names and passwords, auth)
		2. network layer(network firewalls and others)
		3. endpoint layer(devices that have access to network)
		4. application layer(interfaces used to interact with users)
		5. data layer(critical data that must be protected)
		
	Exposure - mistake that can be exploited by a thraet
	
	CVE list - common vulnerabilities and exposures list
	MITRE - collection of non-profit research and development centers
	CNA - cve numbering authority - an organization that volunteers to analyze and distribute information on eligible CVEs
	CVE list criteria:
		1. Independent of other issues
		2. Recognized as a potential security risk
		3. Submitted with supporting evidence
		4. Only affect one codebase
		
	CVSS - Common vulnerabilities scoring system - measurement system that scores the severity of a vulnerability 
	
	OWASP - Open worldwide application security project - security on web
	OSNIT - Open-source intelligence - collection and analysis of information
	
	Vulnerability assessment - the internal review process of an organizations security system
		1: Identificaiton
		2. Vulnerability analysis
		3. Risk assessment 
		4. Remediation
		
	Penetration testing:
		Open-box testing - tester has same privileged acess that an internal developer would have.
		Closed-box testing - little to no access to internal system
		Partial knowledge testing - limited access and knowledge of an internal systems
		
		
	Attack surface - potential vulnerabilities that a treat actor could exploit
	Attack vectors - pathways attackers use to penetrate security defenses: social media, email, usb
	
	
Module 4: threats to asset security
	whats in module: social engineering tactics, malware, web-based exploits, threat modeling process
	
	Stages of social engineering: 
		1. prepare
		2. establish trust 
		3. use persuasion tactics
		4. disconnect from the target
	
	Preventing social engineering: 
		- Implementing managerial controls(policies, standards, procedures)
		- Staying informed of trends
		- Sharing your knowledge with others
	Common types of social engineering:
		- Baiting (finding usb and plugging in device)
		- Phishing
		- Quid pro quo (believing you won something)
		- Tailgating (following person into restricted area)
		- Watering hole (targeting website visited by specific group of users)
		
	Phishing:
		Phishing kit - Collection of software tools needed to launch a phishing campaign. 
		Tools:
			- Malicious attachments
			- Fake data-collection forms/survey
			- Fraudulent web links
	Smishing - Text messages to obtain sensitive information	
	Vishing - Electronic voice communication
	Spear phishing - Subset of email phishing; accountants of small business
	Whailing - High-ranking executives of an organization	
	
	Phishing security measures:
		- Anti-phishing policies
		- Employee training resources
		- Email filtering
		- Intrusion prevention systems
		
	Malware(Malicious Software) - Software designed to harm devices or networks
	Types of malware :
		Virus - Interfere with pc operations and cause damage to data and software; has to be activated by user
		Worm - can duplicate and spread itself on its own
		Trojan - Malware that looks like a legitimate file or program
		Ransomware - Encrypts data and demand payment to restore access
		Spyware - Gather and sell information without consent
		Adware - Unwanted ads
		Scareware - Fake warnings
		Fileless malware - Already in pc; resides in memory
		Rootkits
		Botnet - Multiple pc's infected and controlled by single actor.
		Cryptojacking - Software to illegally mine cryprocurrencies
	
	WEB
	Web-based exploits - Malicious code or behavior that's used to take advantage of coding flaws in a web application
	Injection attack - Malicious code inserted into a vulnerable application
	Cross-site scripting (XSS) - An injection attack that inserts code into a vulnerable website or web application(html and js)
		3 types of cross-site scripting:
			1. Reflected XSS attack - Malicious script is sent to a server and activated during the server's response 
			2. Stored XSS attack - When malicious script is injected directly on the server
			3. DOM-based XSS attack - Malicious script exists in the webpage a browser loads
		
	SQL injection - An attack that executes unexpected queries on a database
	Prepared statement - Coding technique that executes SQL statements before passing them on to the database
	Types of SQL injection:
		In-band SQL injection - Uses the same communication channel
		Out-of-band SQL injection - Uses different communication channel; needs certain features to be enabled on website to work
		Inferential SQL injection - Interpret results by analyzing the behavior of the system.
		Injection Prevention: 
			- Prepared statements - executes SQL statements before passing them on to a database
			- Input sanitization - Removes user input which could be interpreted as code
			- Input validation - Ensures user input meets a system's expectations
	
	Threat modeling - Process of identifying assets, their vulnerabilities, and how each is
exposed to threats. Steps:
		1. Define the scope(Creating inventory of assets and classifying them)
		2. Identify threats
		3. Characterize the environment(putting you'r self in attackers mindset)
		4. Analyze threats
		5. Mitigate risks
		6. Evaluate findings
		
	PASTA  (Process Attack Simulation and Threat Analysis) - popular threat modeling framework
		1. Define business and security objectives (define the retaller wants their app to protect customer data)
		2. Define the technical scope (identify application components that must be evaluated)
		3. Decompose the application (identify existing controls that will protect user data)
		4. Perform a threat analysis (gathering intelligence on types of mobile-app attacks)
		5. Perform a vulnerability analysis (deeply investigate potential vulnerabilities)
		6. Conduct attack modeling (creating attack tree and maps vulnerabilities)
		7. Analyze risk and impact ( analyze all collected data and make risk management recommendations)
		
		
		


COURSE 5: Detection and Response 
	Module 1: Introduction to detection and incident response
		Incident lifecycle frameworks
		NIST CSF last three stages
		Incident - 
			Event - An observable occurrence on a network, system or device
			5 steps of an incident:
				- Who triggered the incident
				- What happened 
				- When the incident took place 
				- Where the incident took place
				- Why the incident occurred
			Incident handler's journal - Form of documentation
			
		Computer security incident response teams (CSIRT) - Group that is trained in incident management and response 
			Command - appropriate leadership
			Control -manage technical aspects during incident response
			Communication - keeping stakeholders informed
		Roles in CSIRT:
			- Security analyst
			- Technical lead
			- Incident coordinator
		Security operations center (SOC) - unit dedicated to monitoring networks, systems and devices for security threats or attacks. Exists in or without CSIRT.
			SOC organization tier L's:
				- SOC tier 1 analyst (monitoring reviewing, prioritizing alerts; creating alerts tickets; escalating alerts to tier 2 and tier 3)
				- SOC tier 2 analyst (receiving tickets from L1; configuring and refining security tools; reporting to SOC led)
				- SOC leads tier 3 (managing the operations of their team; performing advanced detection techniques; reporting to SOC managers)
				- SOC managers (hiring, training; creating performance metrics; developing reports related incidents, compliance and auditing; communicating with executive management)
			
			Elements of security plan: policies, standards, procedures
			Incident response plan - document that outlines procedures to take in each step of incident
			Elements of an incident plan:
				- Incident response procedures
				- System information
				- Other ducuments
				
		Incident response tools
		Tool types:
			- Detection and management tools
			- Documentation tools
			- Investigative tools
			
		Documentation - any form of recorded content
		
		Intrusion detection system (IDS) (true positive, true negative, false positive, false negative)
		Intrusion prevention system (IPS)
		Endpoint detection and response (EDR) - monitors and endpoint for malicious activity. Endpoint is any device connected on a network. Perform behavioral analysis. Uses AI and machine learning.
			IDS and IPS tools: snort, zeek, kismet, sagan, suricata
		
		SIEM - a application that collects and analyzes and report log data
		SIEM process:
			1. Collect and aggregate data (logs, record from ids or ips firewalls apps and more)
			2. Normalize data
			3. Analyze data
			
		April 3 11:01:21 server sshd[1088]: Failed password for user nuhara from 218.124.14.105 port 5023

		In a parsed format, the fields and values are extracted and paired making them easier to read and interpret:
			host = server
			process = sshd
			source_user = nuhara
			source ip = 218.124.14.105
			source port = 5023
			
		SOAR - collection of applications, tools, and workflows that uses automation to respond to security events
		

MODULE 2: Monitoring and analysis
	Network traffic  - The amount of data that moves across a network	
	Network data - Data that's been transmitted between devices on a network
	
	Indicators of compromise (IOC) - Observable evidence that suggests signs of a potential security incident	
	
	Data exfiltration - Unauthorized transmission of data from a system
	Defensive measures:
		1. Prevent attacker access (use MFA)
		2. Monitor network activity
		3. Protect assets
		4. Detect and stop the exfiltration
		
	Network protocol analyzer (packet sniffer) -  A tool designed to capture and analyze data traffic in network
	Packet capture (P-cap) - A file containing data packets intercepted from an interface or network
		
	Version - what version is being used IPv4 or IPv6
	IPv4
		IHL - internet header length -  length of ip header and some options
		ToS - type of service -  if certain packets should be treated with special care
		Total Length - length of entire packet
		Identification/Flags/Fragment Offset - deal with fragmentation; broken up into chunks
		Time To Live - how long can packet live before its dropped, without this packet can loop thru routers endlessly
		Protocol - protocol used with value (tcp is presented with 6)	
		Header Checksum - if any errors occurred in header
		Source Adress .. 
		Destination Adress .. 
		Options - not required and used to network trouble shooting
		
	IPv6
		Version - indicates the IP version
		Traffic Class - Provides information about packets 
		Flow Label - Indicates the packets of flow. A flow is squence of packets sent from a specific source.
		Payload Length - Length of data portion of the packet.
		Next Header - Type of header that follows the ipv4 header such as tcp
		Hop Limit - how can packet travel in a network
		Source Address
		Destination Adress
		
	tcpdump
	
	sudo tcpdump [-i interface]  [option(s)]  [expression(s)]
	
	-i   -  capture network  (-i any will sniff traffic from all network interfaces on the system)
	options(s)    -    further filter network traffic packets
		-w    -    can write or save the sniffed network
		-r    -    read packet capture 
	
	
Module 3: Incident investigation and response
	Analysis - Investigation and validation of alerts
	
	Threat hunting -  proactive searching for threats that are not detected by detection tools.
	Threat intelligence - staying up to date with existing or emerging threats.
	Cyber deception - techniques that deliberately deceive malicious actors.
		Honeypots - system created to deceive, like client credit card information folder,  once actor tries to access it, security teams are alerted
		
		Indicators of compromise (IoCs) - observable evidence that suggests signs of a potential security incident. Who and what of an attack after its taken place.
		Indicators of attack (IoA) -  series of observed events that indicate a real-time incident. Why and how of an ongoing or unknown attack.
		
		Pyramid of pain(picture)
		
		Crowdsourcing - practice of gathering information using public input and collaboration. Getting intel, ideas etc online from many people and organizations.
			Virustotal.com - analyze files urls ip addresses 
			https://urlscan.io/
			https://bazaar.abuse.ch/verify-ua/
			
	Benefits of documentation: 
		- Transparency
		- Standardization
		- Clarity
	Chain of custody - The process of documenting evidence possession and control during an incident lifecycle
	Broken chain of custody - Inconsistencies in collection and logging of evidence in the chain of custody
	Chain of custody establishes:	integrity, reliability, accuracy	
	
	Types of playbooks:
		1. Non-automated - requires step by step actions performed by analyst
		2. Automated -  automate tasks in incidents response proccesses
		3. Semi-automated - combination of two above
		
	Triage - the prioritizing of incidents according to their level of importance or urgency
	Triage process:
		1. Receive and assess (determine if its true positive)
		2. Assign priority
		3. Collect and analyze
		
	THIRD PHASE of NIST incident Reposnose Lifecycle:
		Containment - The act of limiting and preventing additional damage caused by an incident(disconnecting device from the network)
		Eradication -  the complete removal of the incident elements from all affected systems
		Recovery - The process of returning affected systems back to normal operations
		
	FORTH PHASE NIST lifecycle:
		Post-incident activity phase - The process of reviewing an incident to identify areas for improvement during incident handling
		Final report - Documentation that provides a comprehensive review of an incident
		
		
MODULE 4: Network traffic and logs using IDS and SIEM tools
	Whats in module:
		- logs, read and analyze logs
		- Interpret signatures; IDS (using suricada)
		- Search in SIEM tools (splunk, and chronicle)
	
	Log - a record of events that occur within an organizations systems
	Log analysis - The process of examining logs to identify events of intrest
	Log types:
		- Network logs (routers, switches, proxies and firewalls)
		- System logs (by operating systems)
		- Application (software applications)
		- Security logs (IDS IPS)
		- Authentication (login attempts) 
	Commonly used log formats:
		- Syslog (protocol and log format; transports as protocol, as log it has header followed by structured data) - It has three sections: Header; structured data; and message; PORT 514 for plaintext logs, 6514 for encrypted logs
		- JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)(simple and easy to read;store and transmit data; used in clouds; used to write data like logs)
		- eXtensible Markup Language (XML)(language and a format used for storing and transmitting data)
		- Comma separated Values (CSV)
		- Common Event Format (CEF) - Separated |
		
	
	Telemenry - the collection and transmission of data for analysis
	Host-based intrusion detection system  - an aplication that monitors the activity of the host on which its installed
	Network-based intrusion detection system - network traffic and network data 
	Signature analysis - a detection method used to find events of intrest
	
	NIDS rules:
		1. action - determines the action to take if the rule criteria is met(alet, pass or reject)
		2. header - source and destination ip addresses, ports, protocols, traffic direction
		3. rule option
		
	Suricata format type:
		EVE JSON - Extensible Event Format JavaScript Object notation
	Suricata log types:
		- Alert logs
		- Network telemetry logs
		
	SIEM
	Search Processing language (SPL) - splunks query language
	YARA-L - computer language used to create rules for seacrhing through ingested log data(google SecOps)
		Types of search:
			1. UDM search - unified data model (normalized data)
			2. Raw log search (not normalized logs)
